Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn will urge young people to register to vote ahead of the EU referendum in June.

He will say "a vote to remain is about taking control of your future" - at a voter registration drive later.

The Labour leader will say the next generation will be most affected by the outcome of the referendum on 23 June.

Earlier Saga criticised Lib Dem peer Lord Campbell - saying he had suggested older voters were being "selfish" if they backed leaving the EU.

Elsewhere on the campaign trail:

    Former Conservative PM John Major will give a speech in Oxford, accusing those campaigning for the UK to leave the EU of "fuelling prejudice" in the way they discuss the impact of immigration on the UK
    Government ministers Priti Patel and Penny Mordaunt will be out campaigning for a "Leave" vote in Portsmouth
    It follows a row over remarks by Bank of England Governor Mark Carney about the impact of the EU vote on the UK economy
    The two sides have also argued over a "gap" of 1.2m people between different statistics on immigration

On Friday, Mr Corbyn will launch a voter registration drive in Liverpool, telling an audience of young voters that their future is at stake.

EU referendum issues guide: Explore the arguments

The UK's EU vote: All you need to know

Polls suggest that the under-30s are the most pro-EU but are least likely to vote, while older voters are more likely to favour Brexit.

The Labour leader will say his party now has "more members under 27 than UKIP or the Lib Dems have in total membership" adding: "It fills me with hope to know that our movement is reaching out to young people again, because it is you that must shape your future.

"The people who will be most affected by the decision we make in next month's EU referendum will not be my generation, but your generation.

"It is young people who will make the difference in this referendum."

Earlier the former Lib Dem leader Lord Campbell, 74, appealed to his own generation to "think of your children and your grandchildren when casting your vote, and what kind of world you want to bequeath to them".

"You have benefited from decades of peace, prosperity and security that are down to the existence of the European Union," he said.

"Our younger people know this and have benefited from the single market and the right to travel, study and work freely throughout the European Union."

But Saga's communications director Paul Green said: "The notion that older voters are selfish is just plain wrong. In fact, the grey vote is more community spirited and less self-centred than younger voters." 
